Table of contents
 Acknowledgements                                                                           3

 Executive Summary                                                                          4
 1. Author’s intro                                                                          5
 2. Context: the need for industry elimination                                              6
    ‘Isn’t smoking a problem of the past?’
    How bad is it really?
    The tobacco industry is undermining progress more than ever
    Tobacco control efforts manage symptoms, not the root cause
    From controlling tobacco to abolishing it


 3. The concept of ‘tobacco endgame’                                                        10

    1.What is the ‘tobacco endgame’?
    2.The ‘tobacco endgame’ remains widely unknown.
    3.The goal of this report: improving awareness and normalization
    4.Overview of methodology
    5.Four key strategies for improving narratives
       a.Strategy 1: Tell an emotional story to make it easy to understand and remember
       b.Strategy 2: Avoid complexity and jargon to make it accessible to anyone
       c.Strategy 3: Repeat and stimulate conversation to normalize
       d.Strategy 4: Create political momentum through cycles of public support


 4. Recommendations to normalize ‘tobacco endgame’                                          16

      1.Find agreement on one definition: ‘tobacco endgame’ is both a goal and a strategy
     2.Champion the end date as rallying point
     3.Position endgame as a flexible toolkit, not a single policy
     4.Position tobacco endgame as targeting all nicotine products - not just tobacco
     5.Aim all eyes on the culprit, not on the victims
     6.Frame each policy by how it eliminates parts of industry power
      7.Leverage tobacco industry denormalization techniques
     8.Avoid ‘radical’, embrace ‘realistic’
     9.Always emphasize the already high public support
   10.Avoid polarization between those who smoke and those who don’t
     11.Cessation support is imperative to the tobacco endgame
    12.Position endgame as the final step, not a tobacco control replacement
   13.Consider using the ‘leapfrog’ frame to increase attraction
    14.Leverage different types of voices to put endgame higher up the agenda
   + Key ‘tobacco endgame’ statements to use in communications


 5. Endnote                                                                                 33

 6. References                                                                              34




                                                                                                 2
Acknowledgements




                 This report was made possible through the support and guidance of three
                 key organizations.

                 The School for Moral Ambition identified the tobacco epidemic as one of the
                 world's most urgent yet neglected problems and provided the fellowship
                 opportunity that enabled this research. Their commitment to addressing "Big
                 Problems" through strategic talent deployment made this work possible.

                 The Institute for Global Tobacco Control at Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School
                 of Public Health provided institutional hosting and the foundational expertise
                 necessary for this research. Particular gratitude is owed to Dr. Joanna Cohen,
                 whose decades of dedication to tobacco control inspired this report. Dr.
                 Cohen determined the broad scope of this project: a focus on the tobacco
                 endgame. Her guidance, expertise, and mentorship proved invaluable
                 throughout the research and writing process.

                 Additional recognition goes to Chris Bostic and Megan Manning of Action on
                 Smoking and Health USA (ASH USA) for their ongoing support and insights
PREPARED BY
                 that strengthened this work.
Eline Goethals
                 While this report benefited from the wisdom and input of many experts in the
PREPARED FOR     tobacco control field, any errors or omissions remain the author's
ASH USA          responsibility.


                                                                                              3
Executive
Summary

In 2024, the global tobacco market reached $965 billion while their products killed 7 million people.
Despite decades of tobacco control progress, the industry adapts faster than regulations can
evolve, pivoting to new nicotine products while maintaining their addiction-based business model.
The time has come to move from controlling tobacco to eliminating the industry entirely.

The problem: The industry operates like a Hydra—when advertising was restricted, they shifted to
digital marketing. When cigarettes faced regulation, they pivoted to e-cigarettes and nicotine
pouches. Traditional tobacco control was never designed to eliminate the tobacco industry itself. By
focussing on controlling rather than eliminating tobacco products, advocates are doing exactly what
the industry wants: giving them the space to establish new nicotine markets.

The solution: The "tobacco endgame" represents a fundamental shift from reducing harm to
permanently ending the source of harm. This report defines tobacco endgame as "a concrete plan to
end all activities of the tobacco industry with a specific timeline and strategy tailored to each region's
needs." Far from being utopian, countries including New Zealand, Ireland, and Finland have already
set ambitious elimination targets with specific dates.

Strong public support already exists: on average 72% of the public supports phasing out commercial
cigarette sales, and 71% of Dutch youth believe the nicotine industry should not be allowed to exist.
The gap isn't in public willingness, it's in awareness that elimination is achievable through policy.

The challenge: Current tobacco endgame messaging suffers from three critical weaknesses:
inconsistent definitions, lack of cohesive narrative and limited awareness of the full range of
endgame strategies.

The strategies: This report provides 14 strategic recommendations for more effective tobacco
endgame communication to build political will. The recommendations address how advocates can
better coordinate internally, engage policymakers directly, and normalize the concept publicly - all
working toward the same goal of making tobacco industry elimination politically inevitable.

Key actions: Position endgame as targeting all nicotine products. Focus on the industry as the culprit.
Use "realistic" language, never "radical." Always lead with evidence of overwhelming public support.
Frame each policy by how it eliminates industry power.

The imperative: Tobacco industry elimination is inevitable. Their business model depends on
addiction and deception. As long as this remains intact, the industry will continue finding new ways to
create and maintain addiction. The tools, evidence, and public support for tobacco endgame exist.
What's needed now is coordinated messaging to make tobacco industry elimination inevitable. The
century of profiting from addiction is over. The tobacco and nicotine industry must be done.




                                                                                                             4
1. Author’s intro
 This report stems from my seven months exploring the tobacco
 control field with an unusual background: advertising. Inspired by
 Rutger Bregman's book Moral Ambition in May 2024, I left my job
 creating advertising campaigns to address what Bregman calls "Big
 Problems" - urgent global challenges in need of talent, in the search
 of a more impactful existence.

 The School for Moral Ambition identified the tobacco epidemic as
 one of the world’s most urgent yet neglected problems. Anyone
 working in tobacco control knows that there is far too little
 investment in fighting this extremely wealthy industry. In September
 2024, I joined nine other fellows from diverse backgrounds to
 receive training before embedding with key tobacco control
 organizations.


 My experience with tobacco control was very limited, yet one experience proved revealing. Early in
 my career at an advertising agency, I had to work for a Big Tobacco brand and saw how they
 blatantly request creative ideas to bypass regulations and encourage social sharing among youth.
 Even with all advertising regulations in place, the agency still came up with an unexpected campaign
 and channel to get teens to smoke more. This showed me the industry's deviousness and how they
 leverage their wealth to exploit loopholes.

 Within weeks of starting my fellowship, I was stunned. I had completely underestimated the scope
 and impact of this issue. My understanding of health consequences had been limited to linking lung
 cancer with smoking, but I soon learned about effects ranging from medication absorption to
 reproductive health. Even more shocking was discovering tobacco companies' continued influence in
 policymaking, despite regulations prohibiting industry involvement.

 It's unbelievable that so much suffering stems from a handful of companies and their wealthy
 shareholders. Wealth creation for a few is winning over health creation for all, driving social
 inequality and environmental damage.

 I had the chance of being placed at the Institute for Global Tobacco Control at Johns Hopkins
 Bloomberg School of Public Health. Working with Dr. Joanna Cohen, who has dedicated her
 professional career to tobacco control, inspired this paper on the need for better narratives around
 the tobacco endgame. I'm deeply grateful for her welcome, inspiration, and guidance, as well as to
 Chris Bostic and Megan Manning of Action on Smoking and Health USA for their ongoing support.

 By the end of this report, I hope to have convinced you that abolishing the tobacco industry is not
 only possible but necessary, and how improving our narratives help accelerate this goal. Working
 towards elimination is the only way to stop this Hydra-like industry - Hydra, the dragon for which
 every head cut, three more grow. The tobacco and nicotine industry repeatedly prioritize profit over
 public health, and ending their existence with support for those addicted, is the only way forward.

 Let’s dive in.
 Eline Goethals - hello@elinegoethals.be




                                                                                                        5
2. Context: the need for
industry elimination
‘Isn’t smoking a problem of the past?’

   That was the question a close friend asked when I started working in tobacco control in September
   2024. I'll be honest - I wasn't entirely sure either. While vaping seemed on the rise, I thought the major
   battles against tobacco were over in many parts of our world. I could not have been more wrong.

   In 2005, the World Health Organization (WHO) achieved a landmark victory: the Framework
   Convention on Tobacco Control (FCTC), a global public health treaty to reduce tobacco's harmful
   effects, came into force. The treaty, which currently has 182 ratifying countries, created powerful
   momentum. Building on this, the WHO introduced MPOWER in 2008 - a concrete policy package
   offering six cost-effective, high-impact measures to reduce tobacco use. The implementation of
   MPOWER showed promising results: smoking rates dropped in many countries. Despite fierce
   tobacco industry opposition, public health victories kept coming. Until around 2015.

   Since then, the world’s momentum in reducing tobacco use has decelerated. Global smoking rates
   have continued to decline — from 22.8% in 2007 to 17.0% in 2021 — but the pace of the progress
   has noticeably slowed in some regions (WHO, report on Global Tobacco Epidemic, 2023). The
   situation is even more alarming in low- and middle-income countries, where progress in reducing
   tobacco use is slower, and population growth risks offsetting gains in prevalence reduction. This
   stagnation isn't limited to smoking rates - it extends to policy action. Since 2020, fewer countries
   have adopted new tobacco control laws, and progress on implementation has slowed markedly
   (WHO, paper on Global Tobacco Epidemic, 2025).

   To make matters worse, the tobacco industry is working relentlessly by launching a larger
   product portfolio, from nicotine pouches to e-cigarettes - often marketed as safe options for quitting
   smoking. In reality, these are heavily promoted to youth, and it is working: vaping rates are on the rise
   (Salari et al., 2024).

   Not everything is doom and gloom, progress is still happening. Some jurisdictions are winning battles,
   from raising age limits for tobacco purchases to expanding smoke-free zones. However, each new
   policy proposal faces intense tobacco industry opposition. It often takes years of advocacy to pass a
   law, and even then, Big Tobacco deploys litigation to reverse them. We are far from eliminating the
   death and disease caused by their products.

   Today, we stand at a critical inflection point. A well-funded, globally coordinated nicotine industry is
   pushing new products and challenging regulation at every turn, while tobacco control organizations
   struggle with insufficient resources to fight back. Many lack the funding and capacity to advocate for
   and support governments in developing effective policies. At the governmental level, there's a
   concerning lack of political will as tobacco is not seen as a priority (IGTC, 2024).




                                                                                                                6
   This creates a dangerous power imbalance. Advocacy groups and health experts risk being
   excluded from key policy conversations—not due to lack of expertise, but due to structural
   underinvestment and a growing global trend where governments are making it harder for NGOs and
   independent experts to participate in policymaking (CIVICUS Monitor, 2024). Public health systems
   and organizations remain chronically underfunded while the industry deploys billions to maintain their
   stranglehold on policy.




How bad is it really?
      Tobacco kills more than 7 million people every year - of which 1.3 million are people who never
      smoked themselves but were exposed to secondhand smoke (WHO, report on Global Tobacco
      Epidemic, 2025).

      For perspective: the annual death toll exceeds the entire global death toll from COVID-19 (7
      million deaths in total) - yet we don't treat this preventable epidemic with the same urgency.
      Tobacco is not an ordinary consumer product. No other product kills up to two thirds of the
      people who use it exactly as intended (Banks et al., 2015).

      The addictive power of nicotine is staggering: as one can become enslaved to tobacco products
      often within a matter of days (DiFranza et al, 2000). It can take up to 30 attempts to quit smoking
      and many people never succeed (Chaiton et al, 2016).

      In Europe, youth e-cigarette experimentation doubled from 10% (2016) to 20-25% (2024), with
      average initiation at just 13.5 years (Salari et al, 2024). 70% of British youth who vape have also
      tried smoking cigarettes (Royal College of Physicians, 2024).

      Government income from tobacco taxation never outweighs the societal and care costs. For
      example: in Belgium alone, while the government collected €2.64 billion in tobacco taxes in 2012,
      the societal costs of smoking (including health care, lost productivity, and lost years of healthy
      life) exceeded €13 billion. This equals a burden of approximately €1,400 per Belgian adult
      (BELSPO, 2016).




The tobacco industry is undermining
progress more than ever.
   For context: the tobacco industry is dominated by just four multinationals ('Big Tobacco' or ‘Big 4’):
   Philip Morris International, Japan Tobacco International, British American Tobacco, and Imperial
   Brands. The fifth largest manufacturer, China National Tobacco Company mostly sells domestic, but
   export is ramping up. Many alternative nicotine products - heated tobacco (e.g. IQOS), nicotine
   pouches (e.g. ZYN), and e-cigarettes (e.g. VUSE) - are either created or acquired by the Big 4.

   Big Tobacco’s scale is staggering: The global tobacco and nicotine market reached $965 billion in
   2024 (Statista, 2025). Nicotine products are incredibly profitable. In 2018, six major tobacco
   corporations made $55b profit - exceeding the combined profits of Coca-Cola, Pepsico, Nestlé,
   Mondelez, Fedex, General Mills, Starbucks, Heineken, and Carlsberg (Branston et al, 2021).




                                                                                                            7
  While the world has to spend trillions on tobacco-related costs, the tobacco industry rakes in
  massive profits year after year. These companies don't only fight life-saving tobacco control
  measures, they actively drive youth tobacco uptake, damage the environment and despite their
  claims of moving away from cigarettes, continue to make and sell more than 6 trillion cigarettes
  annually. 6,000,000,000,000 per year or 190.000 cigarettes per second (Expose Tobacco, 2024).

  The industry's history is marked by deception, lies, and manipulation. They've lied under oath to the
  American Congress, created fake “consumer protection groups” to fight tobacco legislation, and
  bought pharmaceutical companies to profit from people suffering from COPD (STOP, 2024). The list
  of tobacco industry interference is too long for this document. The University of Bath is currently
  doing an incredible job of keeping track of interference tactics on their website tobaccotactics.org.

  So why has progress slowed down since 2015? The answer is straightforward: intensified tobacco
  industry interference combined with a spectacular image overhaul. Big Tobacco has doubled down
  on their strategies while rebranding themselves as "part of the solution" through newer products like
  e-cigarettes and snus. This strategy began most prominently with the 2016 Philip Morris
  announcement of their new "brand purpose" (“delivering a smoke-free future away from cigarettes”)
  while continuing to profit massively off their cigarette sales (STOP, 2024).

  The industry is increasing their presence at prestigious global forums like Davos, there is a troubling
  revolving door between government and industry positions, and more and more expanded corporate
  social responsibility activities to improve image and gain access to officials (Health Policy Watch,
  2023). The Global Tobacco Industry Interference Index provides concrete evidence of this
  intensification, showing that 43 countries have experienced deterioration in their ability to protect
  health policies from industry influence (Global Tobacco Index, 2023).

  The industry has heavily invested in science and research, strategically using this research to
  position their novel products as harm reduction tools rather than for genuine public health benefit
  (Hendlin et al., 2024). They've now evolved into a multi-addiction business, expanding beyond
  commercial tobacco to include alternatives, cannabis, and even pharmaceutical products (Tobacco
  Tactics, 2024).




Our tobacco control efforts manage
symptoms, not the root cause.

  The tobacco control movement has achieved remarkable victories through traditional measures like
  MPOWER. Smoking rates have declined, smoke-free policies have become the norm, and tobacco
  taxes have increased globally. Yet despite these successes, we face a fundamental problem: the
  tobacco industry adapts faster than our regulations can evolve.

  The tobacco industry operates like the mythical Hydra—cut off one head, and three more grow back
  (Hendlin et al., 2024). When advertising was restricted, they shifted to digital platforms and influencer
  marketing. When health warnings were mandated, they redesigned packages to minimize impact.
  When smoking was banned indoors, they created heated tobacco products and claimed they don't
  produce "smoke." When combustible cigarettes faced heavy regulation, they pivoted to e-cigarettes,
  pouches, and other new products.



                                                                                                              8
   This isn't accidental, it's the predictable result of trying to regulate an industry whose core business
   model depends on deceit and addiction. As long as the fundamental business model remains intact,
   the industry will continue to find new ways to create and maintain addiction. With their massive
   annual revenue, there’s every incentive to stay ahead of regulators.

   While MPOWER policies have saved millions of lives and protect over 6.1 billion people, smoking
   prevalence in many countries remains well above the 5% target commonly associated with tobacco
   endgame goals (WHO, 2025). Even jurisdictions that have fully implemented all MPOWER measures
   continue to face ongoing tobacco- and nicotine-related health burdens. This reflects MPOWER's
   strength as a demand-reduction tool, but also highlights its structural limitation: it was not designed
   to eliminate the tobacco industry itself (Hendlin et al., 2024).

   We're reaching the inherent limits of an approach that tries to manage an industry built on addiction
   rather than eliminating it entirely. Every new regulation becomes a business challenge for the industry
   to solve, not a barrier to their fundamental operations. And when stakeholders believe
   comprehensive change cannot happen, they settle for incremental progress that preserves industry
   power.




From controlling tobacco to abolishing it

   The fundamental question is: why do we still put up with entirely preventable death and disease?
   In a way, these deaths, diseases, and massive investments in public health to combat tobacco harm
   should never have happened in the first place. Unlike food, water, or medicine, commercial tobacco
   and nicotine serves no beneficial purpose for human survival or well-being. It is a wholly artificial
   need, created and sustained for the sake of profit.

   The industry privatizes all the profits while society bears all the risks and costs. This is not like
   fighting pneumonia or congenital diseases - this health crisis exists solely because tobacco
   companies and their shareholders prioritize profits over public health. This is not an issue of individual
   choices, but a systemic problem that requires system-level solutions.

   Imagine a world without the tobacco industry. Healthcare costs would plummet by up to $226.7
   billion annually in the U.S. alone (ASH, 2021), and millions of families would avoid premature grief.
   Resources now treating tobacco-caused illnesses could advance medical research and address
   other health challenges. The economic burden – estimated to exceed $1 trillion globally in costs and
   lost productivity (NCI, 2017) – and community devastation would become history.

   We stand at a crossroads. As the industry doubles down on their strategies, we must respond with
   equal determination. The time has come to move from merely reducing the tobacco industry's harm
   to ending the industry altogether - from controlling tobacco to abolishing it. More and more voices in
   the tobacco control field are calling for the elimination (or ‘abolition’) of the tobacco industry. This is
   not a far-off dream but an actively discussed and in some places implemented concept known as
   the 'tobacco endgame'.




                                                                                                                 9
3. The concept of
‘tobacco endgame’
3.1 What is the tobacco endgame?
  The concept of 'tobacco endgame' represents a fundamental shift in how we think about addressing
  the tobacco epidemic. While tobacco control has focused on reducing tobacco use through
  measures like taxation or smoke-free policies, endgame thinking envisions a definitive end to the
  tobacco industry. Endgame strategies focus on supply-focussed policies that go beyond
  conventional demand-focussed approaches - they include policies like phasing out commercial
  cigarette sales entirely or reducing nicotine to non-addictive levels.

  This concept was developed by trailblazers such as Dr. Ruth Malone, Dr. Ron Borland, Dr. Patricia
  McDaniel, Cynthia Callard, Neil Collishaw, Dr. Carolyn Dresler, Dr. Stephen Marks and Dr. Robert
  Proctor. Academic interest in endgame policies has grown significantly since 2014 (figure below,
  Google Scholar, search conducted Jan 17, 2025), paralleling observations of increasingly aggressive
  industry interference and stalling progress in smoking reduction.




  Far from being utopian, the tobacco endgame is realistic. Countries including New Zealand, the
  Maldives, Ireland, and Finland have set ambitious targets with specific dates for achieving near-zero
  smoking prevalence. The evidence from early adopters and modelling studies demonstrates that
  endgame policies can accelerate progress toward eliminating tobacco-related harm.




                                                                                                          10
3.2 The ‘tobacco endgame’ remains widely unknown.

  Public health stakeholders, policymakers and broader communities often lack familiarity with the
  tobacco endgame concept, limiting broader discussions and support for these transformative
  measures. The possibility of tobacco industry elimination is not always considered viable, reflecting
  decades of industry normalization and perceived economic entrenchment.

  The endgame concept risks encountering skepticism or being dismissed as "too radical" or
  "unrealistic." It may seem implausible at first glance, not because it's impossible, but because we
  struggle to envision alternatives to deeply entrenched systems, even harmful ones.

  This creates a vicious cycle: when a concept remains unknown, it isn't discussed, preventing its
  normalization. The perception that industry elimination is impossible becomes self-fulfilling: when
  stakeholders believe comprehensive change cannot happen, they settle for incremental progress
  that preserves industry power. Breaking this cycle requires making the end of the tobacco industry a
  common topic of conversation among an expanding circle of stakeholders. This repeated exposure
  gradually shifts social norms, and as public support grows, political will typically follows.

  Despite the concept's limited recognition outside tobacco control circles, substantial evidence
  indicates strong public support for the idea of tobacco industry and/ or product elimination.




         72%                                 71%                               75%
       of the public supports (on      of Dutch youth agree with the         of the public in England
       average, across countries)       statement ‘the tobacco and          support the government’s
            the phase-out of              vape industry should not         smokefree goal of smoking
        combustible cigarettes          exist’ (Gezondheidsfondsen,          rates under 5% (ASH UK,
             (Kim et al, 2024)                     2024)                              2023)




  This public sentiment reveals an important insight: the primary gap isn't in public willingness to
  embrace transformative approaches, it's in awareness that these approaches exist and are
  achievable on a policy level. Several factors contribute to this awareness gap.



  01      Inconsistent definitions of ‘tobacco endgame’
          What constitutes the 'tobacco endgame' remains debated among experts (therefore creating
          confusion), with no consensus on whether it means eliminating all tobacco products, ending
          commercial sales, achieving near-zero prevalence or whether it entails taxation or smokefree
          multiunit housing policies. There's also no clear criteria for when policy or strategy proposals
          qualify as 'endgame’ in research (McDaniel et al, 2015).




                                                                                                             11
   02     Lack of a cohesive narrative
          The lack of a unified narrative diverts advocates' energy toward internal debates rather than
          unified action against the industry. The industry benefits from and promotes this division
          among advocates. Another debate benefitting the industry is the tobacco versus nicotine
          focus in endgame thinking. Some authors focus on tobacco products only, others call for a
          phase-out of all nicotine products (not always at the same tempo).



   03
          Wide diversity of potential endgame policies
          Third, the diversity of potential endgame strategies, while actually a strength, can be either
          unknown or overwhelming without proper framing. People might encounter just a single
          strategy (like a specific sales ban), find flaws in it, and dismiss the entire endgame concept,
          unaware of alternative approaches. This prevents understanding that tobacco endgame
          offers a menu of options adaptable to different contexts and needs (McDaniel et al, 2015).




3.3. The goal of this report: improving awareness and
normalization of the ‘tobacco endgame’ concept

   What we see, we can believe—and what we can believe, we can achieve. The tobacco industry
   has maintained its power partly through making its elimination seem unimaginable. But just as we
   once couldn't envision smoke-free restaurants or airplanes, we must now make tobacco industry
   elimination visible, believable, and inevitable.

   Speeding up actionable public and political will requires a deliberate approach to shifting the
   conversation. We want the ‘tobacco endgame’ to stick in people’s minds, to be remembered as
   something we all should strive for. The objectives of this report therefore are:

   1. Increase recognition that tobacco industry elimination is necessary and inevitable         Help
   stakeholders recognize that death and disease will persist as long as the industry exists, as their
   business model depends on addiction. Frame tobacco endgame as the necessary conclusion to a
   century of damage. Desired outtake: “Tobacco endgame is the logical conclusion to decades of
   tobacco control progress.”

   2. Increase belief that tobacco industry elimination is achievable Counter defeatism by showing
   tobacco endgame is a concrete, attainable goal with proven implementation paths and historical
   precedents. Desired outtake: “Tobacco endgame is not a utopian dream, it is a realistic strategy.”

   3. Increase the awareness of the full range of tobacco endgame policies and strategies
   Communicate that tobacco endgame represents a diverse menu of policies and strategies
   adaptable to different contexts. Desired outtake: “There are many ways to get to the tobacco
   endgame, depending on the local context.”

   4. Increase the attraction of tobacco endgame work (and/or efforts)       Tobacco control is globally
   underfunded. Endgame thinking could attract talent and investment as tobacco control receives just
   0.3% of global health aid, with 97% of funding coming from private philanthropy (NCD Alliance, 2024).
   This chronic underfunding limits impact and momentum. Desired outtake: "We should invest more in
   tobacco endgame across all levels."


                                                                                                            12
   These objectives work together to create reinforcing momentum: clear messaging enables both
   stronger public advocacy and bolder political leadership, which reinforce each other to make
   tobacco endgame policies politically inevitable.



3.4 Overview of methodology

   Our systematic approach encompassed an analysis of the 'tobacco endgame' concept from 2013
   onwards, utilizing multiple databases and journals (Web of Science, Google Scholar, BMJ, The
   Lancet, etc). The methodology consisted of:

      A systematic review of academic literature and tobacco control organizations' documentation to
      compile and analyze varying definitions of 'tobacco endgame', enabling identification of key
      commonalities and divergences (Goethals, 2025).

      A narrative analysis examining the framing of ‘tobacco endgame’, with particular focus on
      identifying dominant discourse patterns and their evolution within tobacco policy discussions
      (including a review of press articles mentioning the concept and interviews with key stakeholders
      at multiple tobacco control organizations).

      An extensive inventory of endgame policies and strategies from the literature, coupled with an
      assessment of policy makers' and researchers' awareness of these approaches (Goethals,
      2025).




3.5 Four key strategies for improving narratives

   Before diving into concrete tobacco endgame recommendations, the following recommendations
   give an overview of some general strategies and guiding principles for improving narratives towards a
   broad and non-expert audience. These will give direction to the recommended endgame narratives.




Strategy 1: Tell an emotional story to make it
easy to understand and remember.

   Humans are moved by stories, not statistics. While data on tobacco-related deaths and industry
   profits are important, they rarely catalyze action by themselves. Instead, we must engage people
   emotionally and inspire them to envision, and fight for, a world without the tobacco industry.

   The first chapter deliberately aimed to make you angry at the tobacco industry by highlighting its
   deception and harm. Now, an important second step, this report hopes to channel your anger into
   hope by telling stories about how we can win.

   This approach corrects a common mistake in advocacy communication. We often assume that
   people don't care about certain issues because they lack information, so we bombard audiences
   with the facts, hoping these will speak for themselves. But information without emotion rarely
   motivates action.




                                                                                                           13
    For tobacco endgame communication, this means tapping into emotions such as anger, disgust or
    hope - ideally there’s a combination of both strong positive and negative emotions. It means going
    beyond reciting research or simulations to telling stories about industry deception and lies, children
    who will never be targeted by the industry, or communities reclaiming their health.




Strategy 2: Avoid complexity and jargon to improve accessibility

    The tobacco endgame concept must be understood by everyone—not just public health experts.
    This requires prioritizing clarity and accessibility. Using academic language, technical terms, or
    complex policy explanations creates unnecessary barriers. Too much nuance, while valuable in
    academic discussions, can dilute the emotional impact. Sometimes a clear, compelling story
    requires simplifying complex realities. This doesn't mean being dishonest, it means prioritizing
    resonance over exhaustive detail.

    Currently, tobacco endgame narratives risk using inconsistent definitions and technical terminology
    that makes the concept inaccessible. We should explain necessary technical concepts in
    straightforward terms. And instead of detailed policy mechanisms, focus on outcomes, how each
    approach contributes to the ultimate goal of tobacco industry elimination.

    When in doubt, choose simplicity—even with "expert" audiences. In reality, even policymakers have
    limited time and attention. A clear, fully understood message creates a stronger ally than a complex,
    partially grasped one. Technical details can be provided later as supporting material, but the core
    message must be immediately accessible to drive change.




Strategy 3: Repeat and stimulate conversation to normalize

    Ideas become normalized through repetition and conversation. For tobacco endgame to become
    widely accepted, it must be discussed consistently across multiple channels and contexts. This
    repetition creates mental availability: the concept springs readily to mind when people think about
    tobacco control.

    Effective messaging requires disciplined repetition of key phrases. The tobacco industry has
    mastered this strategy, repeating phrases like "personal choice" and "harm reduction" until they
    became embedded in public discourse. We must be equally disciplined in repeating our core
    messages, for example ‘the tobacco industry can and must be eliminated for the sake of public
    health’.

    Everyone has a role to play in normalizing the tobacco endgame concept. Whether you're a
    researcher, advocate, healthcare professional, or concerned citizen, simply talking about tobacco
    industry elimination as a realistic goal helps shift public perception. The tobacco issue touches all
    levels of society: from healthcare systems to economic productivity, from environmental
    sustainability to social equity. By highlighting these wide-ranging impacts, we can help people see
    their personal connection to the tobacco endgame goal.

    Strategic repetition creates political momentum. When tobacco endgame becomes common in
    conversations and media, politicians begin to see supporting it as safe or advantageous. Ireland's
    smokefree example shows this shift: some CSOs opposed comprehensive bans in 2003, yet Ireland
    implemented the world's first ban just one year later, setting a precedent for the rest of the world.



                                                                                                             14
Strategy 4: Create political momentum through cycles of public support

    Political change happens through reinforcing cycles where public support and political leadership
    strengthen each other. Strong public support gives politicians permission to act boldly, while bold
    political action normalizes previously 'radical' ideas for the public.

    This pattern is visible across successful social changes. Marriage equality gained momentum when
    early political wins (like Massachusetts legalizing same-sex marriage) demonstrated political viability,
    which encouraged more public support, which enabled more politicians to take stands. Ireland's
    smokefree ban followed a similar trajectory: early political leadership shifted public conversation,
    creating space for comprehensive action.

    The tobacco endgame sits at this inflection point. Strong polling support exists but lacks political
    expression. Early political wins, like Brookline, MA's generational sales ban or the Netherlands' retail
    phase-out, create proof of concept that enables bolder action elsewhere. Each political success
    makes the next one easier by demonstrating that endgame policies are both politically viable and
    publicly supported.

    This reinforcing dynamic explains why broad normalization efforts and direct political advocacy must
    work together. Public conversations create permission for political leadership, while political
    leadership validates and amplifies public demand.




                                                                                                           15
4. Recommendations
to normalize tobacco
endgame
   The following recommendations aim to make the tobacco endgame concept more memorable,
   effective, and achievable. These recommendations complement and strengthen each other rather
   than functioning independently. However, just like endgame policies themselves, consider these a
   'menu' of approaches to improve narratives, not a checklist to implement simultaneously.



1. Find agreement on one definition: ‘tobacco
endgame’ is both a goal and a strategy

   The tobacco endgame concept suffers from inconsistent definitions across both academic literature
   and advocacy communications, varying from measures to target. This weakens its power and limits
   broader understanding. The tobacco industry benefits when advocates spend endless time debating
   terminology instead of taking concrete steps toward industry elimination. Don't let definitional
   debates paralyze action. While clarity matters, perfect consensus shouldn't delay implementation of
   effective policies.

   The word ‘endgame’ is used in many contexts, from military to chess. It is understood as the ‘final
   phase before something ceases to exist’. In the tobacco control field, ‘endgame’ is so common that
   it has become impossible to not use it - however its definition requires clarity.

   What tobacco endgame is NOT:
     A single policy like age restrictions or taxation
     Only about reducing smoking rates in individuals (or using terminology that suggests that such as
     ‘tobacco-free generation’) (more on the danger of this framing later on)
     A replacement for existing tobacco control measures
     A utopian dream without concrete implementation paths
     A vague future aspiration without timelines

   What tobacco endgame is:
   The word ‘endgame’ itself provides the framework for a clearer definition: two critical components:
   an 'end' (concrete goal and date) and a 'game' (strategy with policies and tactics to reach that goal).


   ‘End’: A clear, measurable goal on a specific date

   The ‘end’ component must define precisely what should be ending and by when. The theoretical
   ‘end’ in this case could be defined as ‘the permanent elimination of the activities of the commercial
   tobacco industry by a specific date, in a specific jurisdiction’. This framing places the blame on the
   tobacco industry rather than individuals and creates a measurable endpoint.



                                                                                                             16
Every endgame goal must include 1) concrete targets (Key Performance Indicators) and 2) a concrete
timeline. These allow stakeholders to measure progress and hold decision-makers responsible.
Endgame targets to date have focused on smoking usage (e.g. “adult smoking prevalence > 5% by
2030") and therefore center attention on consumer behavior rather than industry activity, ignore
underlying power structures, and allow the industry to pivot to alternatives while maintaining their
addiction-based business model.

Instead, endgame targets might incorporate industry-oriented metrics such as a complete phase-out
of commercial tobacco sales by a specific date, elimination of tobacco industry political influence
(e.g., lobbying, campaign contributions), systematic reduction in tobacco retail outlets or mandated
industry divestment from nicotine-addiction business models. These allow for clearer storytelling and
keep all eyes on the culprit.


       TOBACCO ENDGAME
                                                     END = A CLEAR MEASURABLE
                                                       GOAL ON SPECIFIC DATE




                                  GAME = STRATEGIC PATHWAY
                                     TOWARDS THE GOAL


       TODAY                                                                     A DATE IN
                                                                                 THE FUTURE

‘Game’: Strategic pathways adapted to local context
The ‘game’ component recognizes that different contexts require different strategies. Each
jurisdiction must assess their situation and select appropriate ‘moves’ to reach the defined end.
Local policymakers should focus on permanently dismantling the industry's power, choosing from a
flexible menu of strategies. Some approaches target industry directly, while others work through
user behavior or retailer limitations (McDaniel et al, 2015) - see recommendation 3.

‘Endgame’: The elimination of the tobacco industry AND strategies to get there
This report recommends to consistently frame the tobacco endgame as: ‘A concrete plan to end all
activities of the tobacco industry with a specific timeline and strategy tailored to the specific
jurisdiction’s or each region’s needs.’

By emphasizing both the measurable ‘end’ goal and the adaptable ‘game’ strategies, we create a
narrative that acknowledges the universal goal and the need for locally-appropriate implementation.


 DO                                                DON’T


 Define the endgame as both a goal (‘end’) and     Use vague or inconsistent definitions that
 implementation strategies (‘game’)                weaken understanding


 Focus on industry elimination rather than         Frame goals in ways that shift focus from
 individual behavior change, and frame metrics     industry to individuals (e.g., ‘tobacco-free
 around industry power dismantling (sales          generation’) or rely only on consumer-oriented
 phase-out, political influence elimination)       metrics like smoking prevalence rates



                                                                                                        17
2. Champion the end date as rallying point

   Many countries and jurisdictions have already committed to achieving a "tobacco-free generation" or
   similar goals—typically defined as smoking prevalence below 5%—by specific dates. Research
   reveals that setting clear endgame targets and dates can have positive impacts even before full
   achievement (Nip et al., 2024). Early adopter countries with concrete goals significantly accelerated
   declines in smoking prevalence compared to those without such goals. This suggests that the
   narrative itself, the commitment to a date, can be a powerful driver of change.

   For jurisdictions with existing end dates: make them visible and meaningful. Transform abstract
   policy commitments into concrete moments that create urgency and accountability. Create ongoing
   campaigns around your target date—whether it's called "Tobacco Liberation Day," "Tobacco
   Industry-Free 2030," or another memorable milestone. Track, publicize and champion progress
   toward the goal, making success measurable and visible to the public. Use modelling to warn for
   when the end date and goal are misaligning with political actions.

   For jurisdictions without end dates: make this a priority. There is no tobacco endgame without an end
   date. Advocates should push governments to commit to specific timelines, as these create the
   urgency and accountability that vague aspirations cannot provide.

   Use deadlines to counter industry delay tactics. The tobacco industry benefits from endless debate
   and vague timelines. A concrete date forces action and prevents the industry from running out the
   clock on public health progress. When stakeholders commit to specific dates, it becomes much
   harder to abandon or indefinitely postpone necessary action. Deadlines also create political
   accountability, making delay tactics visible to voters and providing clear benchmarks for measuring
   political progress.




    DO                                                 DON’T

    If your jurisdiction has a target date, actively
                                                       Let existing commitments remain abstract
    campaign about it and track progress
                                                       policy documents without public visibility
    rigorously (including modelling studies)

    If your jurisdiction lacks a target date,          Accept indefinite timelines or vague future
    prioritize pushing for one                         aspirations




                                                                                                           18
3. Position endgame as a flexible toolkit, not a single policy

   The diversity of endgame approaches reflects their strength as a strategic toolkit rather than a
   limitation. This expanding menu of policies and strategies allows jurisdictions to select combinations
   that align with their specific political context, smoking prevalence, and implementation capacity. The
   categories of endgame policies and strategies illustrated below demonstrate this approach:




   When stakeholders dismiss an endgame strategy as 'impossible', we risk them dismissing the entire
   concept, unaware that tobacco endgame offers diverse approaches adaptable to different contexts.

   Emphasize strategic flexibility over specific policies. Explain that endgame represents multiple
   pathways to permanent industry elimination. Different jurisdictions need different approaches based
   on political context, smoking prevalence, and tobacco control infrastructure. Modeling studies prove
   valuable in demonstrating which endgame policies may be more effective in different local contexts
   (Nghiem et al., 2023).

   Correct the "single policy" misconception immediately. When someone dismisses endgame based
   on one policy they've heard about, acknowledge their concern but redirect to the broader strategic
   menu. Explain how various policies dismantle different aspects of industry power, allowing
   policymakers to choose the right combination. This prevents rejecting the entire endgame concept
   based on objections to individual policies, while demonstrating that endgame thinking is
   sophisticated and adaptable rather than rigid.


    DO                                                 DON’T

    Always explain that endgame offers multiple        Present or defend only one specific endgame
    strategic pathways to industry elimination         policy

    Acknowledge legitimate concerns about              Get drawn into detailed debates about
    specific policies while redirecting to the         individual policies without establishing the
    broader toolkit                                    toolkit frame


    Emphasize how different approaches work for        Allow people to dismiss the entire concept
    different contexts                                 based on objections to one policy


                                                                                                            19
4. Position tobacco endgame as targeting all nicotine
products - not just tobacco

   As revealed in a recent study (Hendlin et al, 2024), tobacco corporations have deliberately pursued a
   strategy they call "pharmaceuticalization" – transforming themselves into pharmaceutical-like
   companies that market alternative nicotine products. Internal documents show that tobacco
   companies planned this transition not as a sincere effort to reduce harm, but to "ensure profitability
   and regain social acceptance" as they faced increasing regulation and denormalization.

   Evidence of this strategic deception is overwhelming. Internal documents reveal that in countries
   not yet saturated with cigarettes, the industry continues promoting their deadliest products because
   "there is still money to be made in commercial cigarettes." If they truly cared about harm reduction,
   they would stop aggressive cigarette marketing in developing countries.

   By focusing tobacco endgame efforts only on tobacco products, we are doing exactly what the
   industry wants us to do. While advocates debate cigarette policies, the industry has already pivoted
   to their next generation of addiction products. They are not waiting for cigarettes to be banned—
   they are proactively building their nicotine empire through vapes, heated tobacco products, and
   nicotine pouches. We have to be vigilant about this strategy and not get distracted.

   This is not a future threat—it is happening now. Philip Morris International invested $832 million in
   2024 alone for ZYN nicotine pouch facilities. Reynolds American is expanding nicotine pouch
   production capacity. The industry is betting billions on non-tobacco nicotine products while we
   debate whether to include them in endgame strategies.

   The industry's own logic exposes their deception. New nicotine products are often framed as "harm
   reduction tools" to help people quit smoking cigarettes. If these truly exist to help people transition
   away from cigarettes, then by the industry's own logic, there would be no need for these "harm
   reduction" products once cigarettes are eliminated. The complete phase-out of combustible
   cigarettes automatically justifies the phase-out of all other commercial nicotine products.

   Tobacco endgame must be framed from day one: our goal is not merely eliminating cigarettes, but
   permanently ending the commercial tobacco industry's ability to profit from addiction in any form—
   whether through cigarettes, vapes, heated tobacco, nicotine pouches, or whatever product they
   invent next. However: the pace at which a jurisdiction phases out these different types of products
   can differ based on local context.

   We cannot leave the door open for new manipulations of the industry. Every time we create separate
   strategies for different products, we give them time to establish new markets. The endgame is about
   ending an addiction-based business model, not managing individual product categories.


    DO                                                 DON’T

    Position endgame as eliminating all nicotine
                                                       Allow endless debates about which products
    products in the long term, not just cigarettes.
                                                       to include - exactly what the tobacco industry
    And use market growth data to show the
                                                       wants
    industry's strategic shift is succeeding

                                                       Create separate endgame narratives for
    Focus the narrative on ending addiction-
                                                       different product categories (or just not
    based business models in all forms
                                                       mention other products at all)


                                                                                                             20
5. Aim all eyes on the culprit, not on the victims

   We know smoking is not a personal failing, but a deeply complex issue that traps individuals in a
   cycle constructed by the tobacco industry. The addictive power of nicotine creates dependency far
   beyond individual willpower. Those who smoke are victims of a system engineered to create and
   maintain addiction. Unfortunately, some policymakers continue to use the ‘individual choice’-frame,
   overlooking Big Tobacco’s systemic manipulation.

   This frame critically undermines tobacco endgame discussions. As research (Hoek et al, 2022)
   demonstrates, if smoking is framed as individual choice, the imperative for structural changes to
   tobacco markets becomes less apparent. In other words: tobacco endgame acceptance and
   normalization hinges on tackling the ‘individual choice’-frame. These two frames are mutually
   exclusive.

   Tobacco endgame is about supply-side policies, not demand-side approaches such as restricting
   tobacco marketing or establishing smoke-free zones. Although these policies have achieved
   remarkable progress, they accept the industry’s continued existence. Yet as long as this industry
   remains, it will continue to create and maintain addiction through new strategies.

   Tobacco endgame advocates risk falling into a rhetorical trap, framing these policies around
   protecting youth or denormalizing the act of smoking. This approach, even though mostly well
   intended, mistakenly centralizes individual behavior rather than centralizing the industry's
   manipulative infrastructure.

   In everything we say, we have to focus on the central role of the industry and how tobacco endgame
   gradually eliminates their power, ultimately leading to full elimination. Staying out of the individual-
   choice-frame and fighting it where necessary, is essential here.

   Industry-focused framing also creates political permission for bold action. Politicians can position
   themselves as protecting constituents from corporate exploitation rather than restricting personal
   choices, making leadership politically advantageous rather than risky.




    DO                                                  DON’T


    Focus on the industry as the culprit and            Frame smoking as individual choice or
    emphasize systemic manipulation                     personal failing, no blame or criminalization


    Center narratives on eliminating industry           Center narratives only on protecting specific
    power and manipulation and how policies do          groups (e.g. youth as focus, as if it’s okay to
    this step by step                                   kill adults) or denormalizing smoking behavior



    Center the industry and their conscious             Use terms such as ‘tobacco epidemic’ which
    manipulation and therefore responsibility in        implicitly say ‘uncontrollable virus’, yet
    everything you say.                                 there’s a clear culprit here




                                                                                                              21
6. Frame each policy by how it eliminates parts of
industry power

   Building on the above recommendation, how we talk about endgame policies is just as important as
   the policies themselves. We need to win political will. When discussing policies some advocates
   focus primarily on health benefits or changes in consumer behavior. While these outcomes matter,
   this misses a crucial opportunity: the most compelling way to frame endgame policies is to
   explicitly connect them to the systematic dismantling of industry power.

   This framing requires a deliberate three-step approach, in a simple ladder-shaped structure:

   1. Open with a shocking fact about the industry: start by highlighting a specific, concrete and relevant
   example of industry deception or manipulation, showing how they harm health and/or society. This
   immediately focuses attention on the true culprit and creates emotional engagement.

   2. Then, explain how the specific policy will strip away industry power: clearly articulate which aspect
   of industry influence or power the policy targets and how it will permanently weaken it.

   3. Only then, briefly describe the policy mechanics: after establishing the first two points, explain
   how the policy works, simply and accessibly.

   For example, instead of saying: "A tobacco-free generation policy will protect young people from
   nicotine or tobacco products," try this approach: “The tobacco industry has launched a smart vape, a
   device on which you play a game and take more puffs to get to a higher level. These vapes are often
   filled with shocking levels of nicotine, increasing the odds of addiction. The tobacco-free generation
   policy cuts off the industry’s power over new customers by making it illegal to sell any products to
   those born after a certain date. This gradually puts the industry out of business for good."

   Some endgame strategies target the industry more directly than others. As we've covered, there
   are several categories of endgame strategies and policies. The ‘supply-oriented category' (e.g.
   regulated market models, price caps, sales bans, sunken cost policies,...) is most promising for
   effective framing as these directly target the industry rather than users or products.

   According to Dr. Anna Gilmore (IGTC, 2024), this category of policies may also be the most effective
   in practice, yet they receive less attention worldwide. This is likely because they operate at a more
   fundamental level and can seem too complex. We need to give these policies more attention and
   development; consider this an open call to action.

   The above framing ladder addresses a fundamental challenge in advocacy: your policy is not your
   message. We must talk about what policies will achieve, not just what the policy is called or how it
   works. When asking people if they support banning tobacco sales to anyone below a certain age,
   many will agree. However, when framing it as never having the tobacco industry preying on young
   people again, many more will agree. A popular tagline to promote the generational sales phase-out
   is ‘At what age do you want your kids to start smoking? If never, join us in ending the industry.’




                                                                                                              22
By consistently anchoring each policy discussion in how it dismantles industry power, we make
the endgame concept more coherent and compelling. This approach also makes it harder for the
tobacco industry to co-opt our terminology. They've already claimed terms like "smoke-free" and
"harm reduction" that originated from public health. Our new definition of tobacco endgame,
centered on eliminating industry power, makes it impossible for them to use the term while
continuing their business model. This framing also helps politicians position themselves
advantageously: they become champions protecting citizens from corporate harm rather than
regulators restricting choices.




 DO                                              DON’T


 Always begin policy discussions by
                                                 Focus primarily on how policies affect
 identifying which aspect of tobacco industry
                                                 consumer behavior
 power the policy targets


 Use concrete examples of tobacco industry       Get lost in technical policy details before
 manipulation that the policy will address       establishing the power-dismantling frame


 Connect each policy to the larger goal of       Discuss policies in isolation without
 systematic tobacco industry dismantling         connecting them to the endgame goal


                                                 Use language that could be co-opted by
 Support further development of tobacco
                                                 industry (like "harm reduction" or
 industry ending policies
                                                 "transformation")




                                                                                                  23
7. Leverage tobacco industry denormalization techniques

   A narrative strategy for keeping the industry’s role central, is doubling down on the story of ‘resisting
   corporate power’. Nowadays, a broad audience and even certain policy makers are susceptible to
   the story of an unfair economic system, advancing the few at the cost of the many, of which the
   tobacco industry is a staggering example. The statistics and numbers mentioned in earlier chapters
   can most definitely help here, as most people underestimate the scale of the industry (NEON et al,
   2018).

   The above strategy can be strengthened by the technique of ‘tobacco industry denormalization’. A
   robust body of evidence suggests that denormalization is an effective tobacco control intervention
   at the population level (Malone et al, 2011). This technique denormalizes the industry and the way it
   operates. By exposing concrete manipulations, lies and deceptions of the industry, the
   denormalization frame is useful in stirring up emotions. There is also evidence for the effective
   performance of mass media campaigns carrying strong negative messages about the tobacco
   industry deception (NCI, 2008; IGTC, 2024).

   Governments and jurisdictions are crucial actors in this systemic battle. Tobacco endgame
   narratives must draw more political attention to the issue. The above techniques offer a way in,
   because this issue is not merely a matter of individual behaviors or corporate greed, but of
   institutional failures to protect the public (Malone, 2024).



     DO                                                  DON’T


     Focus on the industry as the culprit and
     emphasize systemic manipulation by                  Center narratives only on protecting specific
     leveraging denormalization or ‘resisting            groups or denormalizing smoking behavior
     corporate power’ frames


     Frame tobacco control as addressing                 Present the issue as primarily about
     institutional failures to protect people            individual behaviors




                                                                                                               24
8. Avoid ‘radical’, embrace ‘realistic’

   The tobacco endgame is not a radical dream, but a realistic path forward. A full range of policies and
   strategies are already available, with evidence continuously expanding. This isn't speculative, it's
   strategic. There are two techniques to make tobacco endgame thinking more realistic in people’s
   minds: using successful examples of regions already making great progress, or pointing to past
   examples of successful and comparable systemic change.

   First, have real, concrete and successful examples ready. While regional approaches don’t allow a
   copy and paste, our brains are wired to appreciate specific, winning stories. Consider below
   promising regional examples, more can be found on projectsunset.ash.org.

      In 2021, Brookline (Massachusetts, USA) passed a first-of-its-kind law, banning tobacco sales to
      anyone born on or after January 1, 2000. This policy prevents new generations from ever being
      sold tobacco, setting legal precedent despite pushback. Over 15 towns in Massachusetts have
      followed suit.
      In 2018, Singapore extended a ban to include the purchase, use, and possession of electronic
      vaporisers, effectively preventing their proliferation before they could gain any popularity.
      In 2024, The Netherlands banned tobacco sales in supermarkets, cutting off 6,400 retail points.
      By 2032, only specialty stores will sell tobacco products, demonstrating how a gradual phase-
      out can dismantle commercial tobacco access.

   Secondly, advocating for unprecedented change such as the tobacco endgame is making people
   visualize a different future. This is often done more effectively when visualizing what the future could
   look like instead of focusing on what's wrong now. However, visualizing a future that doesn't exist yet
   (like tobacco endgame) is hard. The other side of the debate, keeping things the way they are or
   going back to old ways, is surely easier to visualize.

   Asking people to visualize an unimaginable future can make ideas like tobacco endgame sound
   unrealistic. However, this type of big change isn’t always as unprecedented as we might initially think.
   A great way to overcome this hurdle is to point to past examples where society successfully
   underwent major systemic changes. Use examples that people in your region will recognize.
   Concrete examples also give politicians precedent to point to when facing opposition. Early wins
   create political cover for broader action by demonstrating both feasibility and public acceptance.

   Here are some general examples:

      Asbestos: Once used everywhere in buildings, now banned in most places after we learned how
      deadly it is.
      Leaded gasoline: Removed from our fuel despite significant industry resistance.
      Trans fats: These artificial fats were once common in processed foods, from cookies to french
      fries. After linking them to heart disease, many countries banned or severely restricted their use
      in food products.
      CFCs: These chemicals that were destroying the ozone layer were in everything from
      refrigerators to hairspray. These were banned worldwide.
      Slavery: Once legally and economically entrenched in many societies, it was abolished through
      sustained moral, political, and legal action — despite fierce resistance from powerful interests.
      DDT and other harmful pesticides: These were banned despite strong industry opposition.




                                                                                                              25
DO                                            DON’T



Use words such as ‘concrete’, ‘achievable’;   Use words such as ‘radical’, ‘brave’, ‘dream’
‘logical’, ‘realistic’, ‘the next step’       or ‘wish’ to describe endgame



                                              Overstress the lack of long term evidence for
Use concrete examples of jurisdictions
                                              endgame policies, as this is often a counter
implementing endgame policies
                                              technique by the industry


                                              Present tobacco endgame as unprecedented
Use concrete examples from the past
                                              without historical parallels




                                                                                              26
9. Always emphasize the already high public support

   One of the most powerful yet underutilized tools in tobacco endgame advocacy is the existing public
   support for significant action against the tobacco industry. When politicians and policymakers
   hesitate to embrace endgame policies, they often cite concerns about public backlash. However,
   the evidence consistently shows that citizens are far ahead of their leaders on this issue—they want
   bold action to end the tobacco industry.

   Research from multiple countries reveals substantial support for comprehensive tobacco endgame
   measures:

      Australia: 73% of adults support phasing out cigarette sales by 2030 (Brennan et al, 2023)
      United States: 76% of adults—including 62.9% of people who smoke—support mandating very
      low nicotine content (VLNC) in tobacco products” (Kim et al., 2024)
      Canada: 81% of respondents support a "tobacco endgame strategy" (Heart & Stroke Foundation,
      2023)

   This support transcends political divides, with majorities across the spectrum favoring strong action.
   When framed as corporate accountability rather than restricting individual choice, support increases
   further.

   When communicating about tobacco endgame to policymakers, always lead with evidence of public
   support before discussing policy specifics. This addresses their primary concern (political feasibility)
   upfront and creates a more receptive environment for the detailed policy discussion that follows.
   And remember that politicians respond to vocal constituencies, not silent majorities. Try to couple
   polling data with guidance on how supporters can make their voices heard through constituent
   contact, town halls, and organized advocacy.



     DO                                                 DON’T


                                                        Assume policymakers already know about
     Always emphasize high public support and           public support, they might underestimate it
     have recent polling data ready                     based on industry lobbying or simply not
                                                        have tobacco on their radar




                                                                                                              27
10. Avoid polarization between those who smoke and those
who don’t

   A critical component of successful tobacco endgame communication is maintaining unity between
   people who smoke and people who don't. The tobacco industry exploits potential divisions by
   portraying tobacco control as a conflict between "anti-smokers" and "smokers' rights”. This framing
   serves industry interests by creating a false narrative of polarization.

   In reality, most people who smoke want to quit. Surveys consistently show that around 60% of
   tobacco users report wanting to stop smoking (WHO, 2023). The addictive power of nicotine, not
   lack of willpower or desire, keeps many trapped in a cycle they wish to escape. Many people who
   smoke express feelings of resentment toward the companies that profit from their addiction.

   Both people who smoke and those who don’t share a common adversary: the tobacco industry.
   Frame endgame policies as protecting all citizens from an industry that profits from addiction.
   Emphasize how tobacco companies have manipulated their products to be more addictive, targeted
   vulnerable populations, and fought against policies that would help people quit. Emphasize how
   every single person carries a big burden due to the damage done by the tobacco industry, as all
   costs and risks are carried by society.

   When discussing the harms of tobacco, always distinguish between the products, the tobacco
   industry, and the people who use tobacco. Focus criticism on corporate executives and
   shareholders who profit from harm. Ultimately, the most successful tobacco endgame narratives will
   be those that bring people together, offering support to those struggling with addiction while
   maintaining a clear focus on the true source of the problem: the tobacco industry itself.



    DO                                                DON’T


    Emphasize the fact that people who smoke          Blame or criminalize people who smoke. Use
    did not actively choose this addiction: this is   language that stigmatizes people who smoke
    a shared fight, we all want to hold the           or portrays them as lacking willpower,
    tobacco industry accountable for harm they        making bad choices, or being complicit with
    cause.                                            the industry.




                                                                                                         28
11. Cessation support is imperative to the tobacco endgame


   While most countries already have established cessation programs, these support systems must be
   comprehensive and/or fully funded as part of any tobacco endgame strategy. Endgame policies
   must never remove access to addictive products without ensuring robust help for those currently
   dependent on them. This is both ethically necessary and strategically essential.

   As prevalence continues to decline, those who still smoke often face greater barriers to quitting,
   including higher levels of addiction, mental health challenges, and socioeconomic disadvantages.
   Research by Hoek et al. (2022) demonstrates that as smoking becomes less common, those who
   continue face increased stigmatization, which paradoxically may deepen their perceived smoking
   identity and make successful cessation even more difficult. This is precisely why endgame
   communications must avoid any language that could add to this stigmatization.

   Cessation support serves several strategic functions in advancing the tobacco endgame:

    1.It counters industry narratives about individual choice
    2.It maintains coalition strength with healthcare providers and advocates
    3.It addresses legitimate policy concerns from policymakers
    4.It creates a successful feedback loop as more people quit




    DO                                                DON’T


    Talk about cessation as an essential
    complement to endgame and frame it as             Allow framing of endgame policies as
    society’s response to tobacco industry-           abandoning or punishing people who smoke
    created harm


    Emphasize how both cessation and
                                                      Position cessation support as optional or
    endgame work together to eliminate the
                                                      secondary to endgame
    tobacco industry




                                                                                                        29
12. Position endgame as the final step, not a tobacco control
replacement

   A study of six countries pioneering tobacco endgame strategies (Nip et al., 2024) reveals endgame
   approaches work best in contexts with strong tobacco control infrastructures and low smoking
   prevalence. This suggests effective endgame narratives must be clear: this is not about discarding
   existing measures like MPOWER, but taking the next logical step. The key communication challenge
   is positioning endgame as a natural progression rather than replacement.

   Despite the comprehensive MPOWER framework, challenges remain in reducing tobacco use to
   near-zero levels. Even in jurisdictions with high implementation scores, smoking prevalence currently
   remains above the 5% endgame threshold. While these measures create essential foundations, they
   may not be sufficient to achieve endgame goals alone due to:

    1.Implementation and enforcement challenges plague critical areas such as smoke-free
      environment regulations, advertising bans, and taxation policies.
    2.Industry adaptation and interference allows for tobacco companies to consistently find ways to
      circumvent restrictions, whether through product design, marketing, sponsorships, or
      promotions.
    3.Products like e-cigarettes and heated tobacco products create new challenges that traditional
      control measures weren't designed to address.

   This relationship between conventional tobacco control and endgame policies needs more
   research, but from a communications perspective: always acknowledge the crucial foundation that
   the FCTC, MPOWER and similar frameworks have provided. Position endgame strategies as building
   upon these foundations—the logical next step that becomes possible after conventional tobacco
   control has reduced prevalence.

   The most effective narratives position the tobacco endgame as the culmination of decades of
   tobacco control progress, a sophisticated approach that builds on existing efforts while addressing
   their limitations to achieve the ultimate goal of permanently ending the tobacco industry.




    DO                                                 DON’T


    Frame endgame strategies as the natural            Position endgame as a replacement for or
    next step that’s both possible and necessary       criticism of existing tobacco control
    after conventional tobacco control has             measures that have produced significant
    reduced prevalence to a certain level.             public health gains.




                                                                                                           30
13. Consider using the ‘leapfrog’ frame to increase attraction


   While the above recommendation emphasizes endgame as a natural next step, an emerging
   complementary frame offers an alternative narrative: the concept of ‘leapfrogging’. This suggests
   some jurisdictions might accelerate progress by adopting certain endgame policies directly,
   potentially bypassing some intermediate steps in traditional tobacco control.

   Leapfrogging describes how countries can skip developmental stages by adopting advanced
   solutions directly, as was illustrated by many African countries skipping telephone landlines in favor
   of mobile phones (Ritchie, 2024). In tobacco control, this suggests some jurisdictions might rapidly
   advance by implementing certain endgame strategies rather than following a step-by-step
   incremental approach.

   While promising from a communications standpoint, the leapfrogging approach requires further
   research. We need more evidence on which endgame policies might work without the full foundation
   of traditional measures, and in which contexts.

   Successful leapfrogging depends on tailored strategies aligned with local social, cultural, and
   political landscapes. Use this framing selectively with audiences who might find it appealing,
   particularly policymakers seeking innovative approaches to seemingly intractable problems. For
   example, Sub-Saharan Africa might be a potential target for the leapfrogging narrative as the
   smoking prevalence is currently low but on the rise.




    DO                                                 DON’T


    Present leapfrogging as an exciting approach       Position it as a proven strategy without
    for specific contexts                              sufficient evidence (it is not - yet)


    Use the leapfrogging frame to spark new
    interest where it has stalled for traditional      Suggest it can replace foundational tobacco
    approaches and/or a way to save time (vs           control work
    incremental policies year after year)




                                                                                                            31
14. Leverage different types of voices to put endgame higher
up the agenda

   Many tobacco control organizations have proven to be excellent collaborative partners for
   governments worldwide. As they've been invaluable in policy development and research, a strategic
   question arises: how can the movement position tobacco endgame as mainstream rather than
   radical? This final recommendation explores how different voices using varying degrees of boldness
   can push social norms forward.

   Research on social movements demonstrates the "radical flank effect" - more radical factions can
   increase support for moderate groups and their goals (Simpson et al, 2022). This creates a strategic
   opportunity: when some voices call for bolder action, other organization’s proposals suddenly
   appear more moderate and reasonable by comparison.

   The endgame movement will benefit from having a diverse ecosystem of actors using different
   approaches and levels of boldness. Some organizations may have direct relationships with
   policymakers that require measured approaches, while others can afford to be more confrontational.
   This isn't about "established vs. grassroots" - it's about strategic role differentiation within the
   movement.

   When some advocates call for immediate and complete abolition of the tobacco industry, proposals
   for phased elimination over a decade appear moderate and reasonable by comparison. This
   strategic positioning helps normalize endgame thinking across the political spectrum.

   Tobacco endgame advocacy can also include natural allies from other public interest sectors.
   Environmental groups have proven particularly effective advocates, leading successful campaigns
   like the Manhattan Beach sales ban (led by Surfriders) and the Santa Cruz County cigarette filter ban
   (ASH, 2024). Consumer protection organizations, human rights groups, anti-poverty advocates, and
   healthcare access organizations all have compelling reasons to support tobacco industry
   elimination.



     DO                                                DON’T


     Allow different actors to play                    Dismiss radical voices as counterproductive
     complementary roles and welcome tactical          or expect all organizations to use the same
     approaches within the movement                    approach




                                                                                                           32
5. Endnote
    They’ll profit from people until the end,
    until people make it end.
    Looking back thirty years, we believed that having smokefree workplaces or
    not smoking on a plane were totally ludicrous ideas. By now, this has
    become the social norm and standard. It's time to push this forward. The
    cigarette century is over. The nicotine and tobacco industry has to be done.

    Anyone reading this report can help spread this new social norm by making
    it a topic of conversation. Whether you're a policy advisor, professional in
    the health sector or just a curious reader, you too can play a massive role in
    advancing this concept. Above all, this report is meant to spark a
    conversation around tobacco endgame, for the concept to become more
    normalized.

    To sum up, the tobacco industry has shown remarkable resilience and
    adaptability over decades. Current tobacco control measures will never be
    enough. By normalizing the concept of tobacco industry elimination through
    consistent, compelling messaging, we can build the public and political will
    necessary for bold action. The tobacco endgame isn't just possible, it's
    already beginning in jurisdictions worldwide. Join the conversation, share
    these messages, help make the end of the tobacco industry inevitable and
    stand on the right side of history.




                     Thank you for reading this report.
            If you have any questions or would like to
           discuss findings further, please reach out.
                                                               Eline Goethals
                                                             +32496482740
                                                      hello@elinegoethals.be


                                                                                     34
6. References
Action on Smoking and Health (ASH UK). (2023). Public support for Government action on tobacco in
Great Britain: Results of the 2023 ASH Smokefree GB. London: ASH. Retrieved July 13, 2025, from
https://ash.org.uk/uploads/Public-support-for-Government-action-on-tobacco-in-Great-Britain-
Results-of-the-2023-ASH-Smokefree-survey.pdf?v=168958451.

Action on Smoking and Health (ASH). (2024, May 17). Santa Cruz County's first-in-the-world cigarette
filter ban. Retrieved July 13, 2025, from https://ash.org/santa-cruz-countys-first-in-the-world-
cigarette-filter-ban/.

Baylis, S. (2025). Towards a Tobacco-Free Future: EU Legislation and the Feasibility of a Tobacco
Endgame for Member States. European Respiratory Society. Retrieved July 13, 2025, from
https://www.ersnet.org/news-and-features/news/ers-offers-eu-member-states-a-clear-pathway-to-
introducing-a-generational-sales-ban-on-tobacco/.

Belgian Science Policy Office (BELSPO). (2016). Socioeconomic cost of traffic accidents (DR/65).
Retrieved July 13, 2025, from https://www.belspo.be/belspo/fedra/DR/DR65_Socost_sum_en.pdf.

Branston, J. R. (2021). Industry profits continue to drive the tobacco epidemic: A new endgame
approach for tobacco control? Tobacco Prevention and Cessation, 2021(7), 45.
https://doi.org/10.18332/tpc/138232.

Brennan, E., Ilchenko, E., Scollo, M., Durkin, S. J., & Wakefield, M. A. (2022). Public support for policies
to phase out the retail sale of cigarettes in Australia: Results from a nationally representative survey.
Tobacco Control. https://doi.org/10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2021-057122.

Chaiton, M., Diemert, L., Cohen, J. E., Bondy, S. J., Selby, P., Philipneri, A., & Schwartz, R. (2016).
Estimating the number of quit attempts it takes to quit smoking successfully in a longitudinal cohort
of smokers. BMJ Open, 6(6), e011045. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011045.

CIVICUS. (2024). People power under attack 2024. CIVICUS Monitor. Retrieved July 13, 2025, from
https://findings2020.monitor.civicus.org/.

DiFranza, J. R., Rigotti, N. A., McNeill, A. D., et al. (2000). Initial symptoms of nicotine dependence in
adolescents.       Tobacco       Control,     9,     313-319.      Retrieved   July    13,    2025,  from
https://tobaccocontrol.bmj.com/content/9/3/313.

Expose Tobacco. (2024). Who is Big Tobacco?                        Retrieved    July   13,   2025,    from
https://exposetobacco.org/news/who-is-big-tobacco/.

Gezondheidsfondsen voor Rookvrij. (2022). Onderzoek: Jongeren klaar met de tabaksindustrie. KWF
Kankerbestrijding. Retrieved July 13, 2025, from Gezondheidsfondsen voor Rookvrij. (2024).
Generation Monitor 2024. KWF Kankerbestrijding.

Gezondheidsfondsen voor Rookvrij. (2024). Generation Monitor 2024. KWF Kankerbestrijding.

Institute for Global Tobacco Control Innovations in Tobacco Control Lecture Series. (2024, February
10). Tobacco industry tactics: Understanding their strategies [Webinar with Dr. Anna Gilmore].
YouTube. Retrieved July 13, 2025, from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=enBb-e_gXsU.

                                                                                                               35
Global Tobacco Index. (2023). Global Tobacco Industry Interference Index 2023. Retrieved July 13,
2025, from https://globaltobaccoindex.org/report-summary.

Google Scholar. (2025). Mentions of "tobacco endgame" in academic literature. Retrieved July 13,
2025, from https://scholar.google.com.

Health Policy Watch. (2023). Tobacco Industry's Interference In Government Policy Increases
Globally. Retrieved July 13, 2025, from https://healthpolicy-watch.news/tobacco-industrys-
interference-in-government-policy-increases-globally/.

Heart & Stroke Foundation. (2023). A tobacco endgame for Canada. Retrieved July 13, 2025, from
https://www.heartandstroke.ca/-/media/pdf-files/policy-statements/tobacco-policy-statement.pdf.

Hendlin, Y. H., Le Han, E., & Ling, P. M. (2024). Pharmaceuticalisation as the tobacco industry's
endgame. BMJ Global Health, 9:e013866. https://gh.bmj.com/content/9/2/e013866.

Hoek, J., Edwards, R., & Waa, A. (2022). From social accessory to societal disapproval: smoking,
social    norms   and    tobacco    endgames.    Tobacco     Control,   31(2),  358-364.    doi:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35241613/.

Kim, H., Gartner, C., Edwards, R., Puljević, C., Morphett, K., Kim, D. H., Chun, H.-R., Ekdahl, M., & Kang, H.
(2024). Public support for tobacco endgame policies: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
medRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.01.07.24300815.

Malone, R. E. (2013). The race to a tobacco endgame. Tobacco Control, 22(Suppl 1), i2-i4.
https://doi.org/10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2013-051246.

Malone, R. (2024). Breaking society's addiction and deconstructing norms [Online course module].
Action    on   Smoking     and     Health     California. Retrieved   July  13,    2025,   from
https://endtobaccoca.ash.org/endgame-course-modules/.

Malone, R. E., Grundy, Q., & Bero, L. A. (2012). Tobacco industry denormalisation as a tobacco control
intervention: a review. Tobacco Control, 21(2), 162-70. doi: 10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2011-050200.

McDaniel, P. A., Smith, E. A., & Malone, R. E. (2015). The tobacco endgame: A qualitative review and
synthesis. Tobacco Control, 25(5), 594-604. https://doi.org/10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2015-052356.

Mirisch, J. (2021, November 15). “You can’t do that, can you? Yes, you can.” Why tobacco sales bans
are good municipal policy. Retrieved July 13, 2025, from https://ash.org/tobacco-sales-bans-are-
good-municipal-policy/.

National Cancer Institute. (2008). The role of the media in promoting and reducing tobacco use
(Tobacco Control Monograph No. 19, NIH Pub. No. 07-6242). U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, National Institutes of Health, National Cancer Institute. Retrieved July 13, 2025, from
https://cancercontrol.cancer.gov/sites/default/files/2020-08/m19_complete.pdf.

NCD Alliance. (2024). Tracking NCD funding flows: Urgent calls and global solutions. Retrieved July
13, 2025, from https://hpfhub.info/wp-content/uploads/2024/08/Tracking-NCD-Funding-Flows-
Urgent-Calls-and-Global-Solutions-NCDA-2024.pdf.

New Economy Organisers Network (NEON), New Economics Foundation (NEF), FrameWorks Institute,
& Public Interest Research Centre (PIRC). (2018). Framing the economy: How to win the case for a
better system. Retrieved July 13, 2025, from https://neweconomics.org/uploads/files/Framing-the-
Economy-NEON-NEF-FrameWorks-PIRC.pdf.

                                                                                                                 36
Nghiem, N., Cleghorn, C. L., Leung, W., Nokes, K., Kvizhinadze, G., Petrović-van der Deen, F. S., ... &
Wilson, N. (2023). Tobacco endgame intervention impacts on health gains and Māori: non-Māori
health inequity: a simulation study of the Aotearoa/New Zealand Tobacco Action Plan. Tobacco
Control, 32(1), 25-34. doi: 10.1136/tc-2022-057655.

Nip, J., et al. (2024). Commercial tobacco endgame goals: early experiences from six countries.
Nicotine and Tobacco Research, 26(10), 1322-1330. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38547327.

Ritchie, H. (2024, June 6). Many countries are “leapfrogging” landlines and going straight to mobile
phones. Our World in Data. Retrieved July 13, 2025, from https://ourworldindata.org/data-
insights/many-countries-are-leapfrogging-landlines-and-going-straight-to-mobile-phones.

Royal College of Physicians. (2024). E-cigarettes and harm reduction: An evidence review. Retrieved
July 13, 2025, from https://www.rcp.ac.uk.

Salari, N., Rahimi, S., Darvishi, N., Abdolmaleki, A., & Mohammadi, M. (2024). The global prevalence of
E-cigarettes in youth: A comprehensive systematic review and meta-analysis. Public Health Practice
(Oxford), 7, 100506. doi: 10.1016/j.puhip.2024.100506.

Simpson, B., Willer, R., & Feinberg, M. (2022). Radical flanks of social movements can increase
support        for      moderate       factions.      PNAS        Nexus,      1(3),    pgac110.
https://doi.org/10.1093/pnasnexus/pgac110.

Statista (2025). Tobacco products market value worldwide from 2018 to 2030. Retrieved from
https://www.statista.com/forecasts/1098876/tobacco-global-market-value/

STOP. (2024). Addiction at any cost: Philip Morris International uncovered. STOP (Stopping Tobacco
Products and Organizations). Retrieved July 13, 2025, from https://exposetobacco.org

Winickoff, J. P., McMillen, R., Vallone, D. M., & Pearson, J. L. (2022). Public support for FDA regulation
of      nicotine      levels      in      cigarettes.    Tobacco          Control,     31(1),    103–104.
https://doi.org/10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2020-056245.

World Health Organization. (2023). WHO report on the global tobacco epidemic, 2023. World Health
Organization.           Retrieved            July            13,          2025,            from
https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240077164.

World Health Organization. (2025). WHO report on the global tobacco epidemic, 2025. World Health
Organization. Retrieved July 13, 2025, from https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240112063.

Xu, X., Shrestha, S. S., Trivers, K. F., Neff, L., Armour, B. S., & King, B. A. (2021). U.S. healthcare
Spending attributable to cigarette smoking in 2014. Journal of Preventive Medicine, 150, 106529.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ypmed.2021.106529.




                                                                                                             37
